# Phonons

## Introduction

A phonon is a collective excitation of a set of atoms in condensed
matter. These excitations can be decomposed into different modes, each
being associated with an energy that corresponds to the frequency of the
vibration. The different energies associated with each vibrational mode
constitute the phonon vibrational spectra (or phonon band structure).
The vibrational spectra of materials play an important role in physical
phenomena such as thermal conductivity, superconductivity,
ferroelectricity and carrier thermalization.

There are different methods to calculate the vibrational spectra from
first-principles using the density functional theory formalism (DFT). It
can be obtained from the Fourier transform of the trajectories of the
atoms on a molecular dynamics run, from finite-differences of the total
energy with respect to atomic displacements or directly from density
functional perturbation theory (DFPT). The latter method is the one used
in the calculations on the Materials project page.

## Formalism

In the density functional perturbation theory formalism the derivatives
of the total energy with respect to a perturbation are directly obtained
from the self-consistency loop [^1] For a generic point **q** in the
Brillouin zone the phonon frequencies \\(\omega\_{\mathbf{q},m}\\) and
eigenvectors \\(U_m(\mathbf{q}\kappa'\beta)\\) are obtained by solving
of the generalized eigenvalue problem

\\[\sum\_{\kappa'\beta}\widetilde{C}\_{\kappa\alpha,\kappa'\beta}(\mathbf{q})U\_m(\mathbf{q}\kappa'\beta) = M\_{\kappa}\omega^2\_{\mathbf{q},m}U\_m(\mathbf{q}\kappa\alpha),\\]

where \\(\kappa\\) labels the atoms in the cell, \\(\alpha\\) and
\\(\beta\\) are cartesian coordinates and
\\(\widetilde{C}\_{\kappa\alpha,\kappa'\beta}(\mathbf{q})\\) are the
interatomic force constants in reciprocal space, which are related to
the second derivatives of the energy with respect to atomic
displacements. These values have been obtained by performing a Fourier
interpolation of those calculated on a regular grid of **q**-points
obtained with DFPT.

## Thermodynamic properties

The vibrational density of states \\(g(\omega)\\) is obtained from an
integration over the full Brillouin zone

\\[g(\omega) = \frac{1}{3nN}\sum\_{\mathbf{q},m}\delta(\omega-\omega\_{\mathbf{q},m}),\\]

where \\(n\\) is the number of atoms per unit cell and \\(N\\) is the
number of unit cells. The expressions for the Helmholtz free energy
\\(\Delta F\\), the phonon contribution to the internal energy
\\(\Delta E\_{\text{ph}}\\), the constant-volume specific heat \\(C_v\\)
and the entropy \\(S\\) can be obtained in the harmonic approximation
[^2]

\\[\Delta F = 3nNk\_BT\int\_{0}^{\omega\_L}\text{ln}\left(2\text{sinh}\frac{\hbar\omega}{2k\_BT}\right)g(\omega)d\omega\\]

\\[\Delta E\_{\text{ph}} = 3nN\frac{\hbar}{2}\int\_{0}^{\omega\_L}\omega\text{coth}\left(\frac{\hbar\omega}{2k\_BT}\right)g(\omega)d\omega\\]

\\[C\_v = 3nNk\_B\int\_{0}^{\omega\_L}\left(\frac{\hbar\omega}{2k\_BT}\right)^2\text{csch}^2\left(\frac{\hbar\omega}{2k\_BT}\right)g(\omega)d\omega\\]

\\[S = 3nNk\_B\int\_{0}^{\omega\_L}\left(\frac{\hbar\omega}{2k\_BT}\text{coth}\left(\frac{\hbar\omega}{2k\_BT}\right) - \text{ln}\left(2\text{sinh}\frac{\hbar\omega}{2k\_BT}\right)\right)g(\omega)d\omega,\\]
where \\(k_B\\) is the Boltzmann constant and \\(\omega_L\\) is the
largest phonon frequency.

## Calculation details

All the DFT and DFPT calculations are performed with the ABINIT software
package [^3] [^4].

The PBEsol [^5] semilocal generalized gradient approximation
exchange-correlation functional (XC) is used for the calculations. This
functional is proven to provide accurate phonon frequencies compared to
experimental data [^6]. The pseudopotentials are norm-conserving [^7]
and taken from the pseudopotentials table Pseudo-dojo version 0.3 [^8].

The plane wave cutoff is chosen based on the hardest element for each
compound, according to the values suggested in the Pseudo-dojo table.
The Brillouin zone is sampled using equivalent **k**-point and
**q**-point grids that respect the symmetries of the crystal with a
density of approximately 1500 points per reciprocal atom and the
**q**-point grid is always $\Gamma$-centered [^9].

All the structures are relaxed with strict convergence criteria, i.e.
until all the forces on the atoms are below $10^{-6}$ Ha/Bohr and the
stresses are below $10^{-4}$ Ha/Bohr$^3$.

The primitive cells and the band structures are defined according to the
conventions of Setyawan and Curtarolo [^10].

## Citation

Guido Petretto, Shyam Dwaraknath, Henrique P. C. Miranda, Donald
Winston, Matteo Giantomassi, Michiel J. van Setten, Xavier Gonze,
Kristin A. Persson, Geoffroy Hautier, Gian-Marco Rignanese,
_High-throughput density functional perturbation theory phonons for
inorganic materials_, **Scientific Data**, 5, 180065 (2018).
[doi:10.1038/sdata.2018.65](https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2018.65)

## References

[^1]:
    Gonze, X. & Lee, C. Dynamical matrices, Born effective charges,
    dielectric permittivity tensors, and interatomic force constants
    from density functional perturbation theory. Phys. Rev. B 55,
    10355–10368 (1997)

[^2]:
    C. Lee & X. Gonze, Ab initio calculation of the thermodynamic
    properties and atomic temperature factors of SiO2 α-quartz and
    stishovite. Phys. Rev. B 51, 8610 (1995)

[^3]:
    Gonze, X. et al. First-principles computation of material
    properties: the Abinit software project. Computational Materials
    Science 25, 478 – 492 (2002)

[^4]:
    Gonze, X. et al. ABINIT: First-principles approach to material and
    nanosystem properties. Computer Physics Communications 180, 2582 –
    2615 (2009)

[^5]:
    Perdew, J. P. et al. Restoring the density-gradient expansion for
    exchange in solids and surfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 136406 (2008)

[^6]:
    He, L. et al. Accuracy of generalized gradient approximation
    functionals for density-functional perturbation theory calculations.
    Phys. Rev. B 89, 064305 (2014)

[^7]:
    Hamann, D. R. Optimized norm-conserving Vanderbilt
    pseudopotentials. Phys. Rev. B 88, 085117 (2013)

[^8]:
    van Setten, M., Giantomassi, M., Bousquet, E., Verstraete, M.J.,
    Hamann, D.R., Gonze, X. & Rignanese, G.-M., et al. The PseudoDojo:
    Training and grading a 85 element optimized norm-conserving
    pseudopotential table (2018). Computer Physics Communications 226, 39.

[^9]:
    Petretto, G., Gonze, X., Hautier, G. & Rignanese, G.-M.
    Convergence and pitfalls of density functional perturbation theory
    phonons calculations from a high-throughput perspective.
    Computational Materials Science 144, 331 – 337 (2018)

[^10]:
    Setyawan, W. & Curtarolo, S. High-throughput electronic band
    structure calculations: Challenges and tools. Computational
    Materials Science 49, 299 – 312 (2010)
