# Interface Reactions

## Introduction

Interfaces between solid phases are critical in determining the optical, mechanical, and transport properties of a system. Interfacial reactions can occur when two contacting materials are not thermodynamically stable against each other. Information about interface reactions is valuable in various aspects: the reaction energy reflects the reactivity of the interface, and the reaction products affect the performance of devices such as Li-ion batteries and photovoltaic cells that are built from these materials.

Experimental investigation of interface reactions is challenging, as accessing the interface between two solids is difficult and the reaction layers have only limited thickness. It is thus highly valuable to predict possible interface reactions from a computational approach.

The Materials Project database provides calculated formation energies for a wide range of inorganic materials. By using all compounds in the relevant chemical system from the Materials Project database, one can construct reaction energy plots for the interface systems at the thermodynamic ground state (0 K and 0 atm).

This Manual outlines the usage of the Interface Reactions App and the computational methods employed.

## Using the Interface Reactions App

To construct the reaction energy plot for a closed system, enter the two reactants in contact into the fields “Reactant 1” and "Reactant 2" and click on “Compute” button.

In the case where the interface system is open to a particular element at a constant chemical potential (e.g., solid-state synthesis under constant $O_2$ gas flow), after entering the reactants, click on "Advanced options", and then check the "Open element?" box, select the element from the drop-down list, and enter the desired relative chemical potential. Note that the relative chemical potential of an element is referenced to the chemical potential of pure substance of that element. For example, for element Li, the reference chemical potential is that of Li metal. Users can also use the slider bar to change the chemical potential for gaseous phase. For gaseous phase such as $O_2$, increasing temperature and/or decreasing the pressure leads to a lower chemical potential of the element.

As the plot is generated, it shows the reactivity (normalized reaction energy) of the interface as a function of molar fraction $x$ of the first reactant. There are multiple ways to get reaction information:

- When mousing over a node on the plot, the pop-up window shows the reactivity (eV/atom) and the reaction equation.
- You can zoom into a portion of the plot by defining a zoom area: click and hold at the upper-left corner of the desired area, and drag down and right, releasing the mouse at the lower-right corner of the desired area. The window should be replaced by the zoomed-in portion. To return to the original phase diagram, click “Autoscale” button in the tool bar at the upper-right corner.
- The reaction energy plot can be downloaded in PNG format by clicking the first button in the tool bar at the upper-right corner.
- The table below the plot shows the detailed information of the reactions at critical molar fractions.


## Interpreting Reaction Energy Plots

The section shows how to interpret reaction energy plot generated by Interface Reactions App. In the table presented below the plot, you can review, for each node in the plot, the corresponding quantities:

- **mol fraction**: The molar fraction of the first input reactant
- **reactivity (eV/atom)**: The reaction energy normalized to the total number of atoms in reactants. (For open system, the element in the reservoir is excluded in the normalization.)
- **reaction equation**: A reaction equation chosen to normalize one of the reactants.
- **reaction energy** (kJ/mol): The reaction energy (per mol) of the displayed reaction equation.
All input reactants are converted to reduced cell formulae. For example, the app will treat the reactant $\ce{Li2Co2O4}$ as $\ce{LiCoO2}$ in the reaction equation.

### Reaction Plots in Closed Systems

To illustrate the reaction information obtainable from the Interface Reactions app, we use Figure 1 as an example for $/ce{LiCoO2}-/ce{Li3PS4}$ system (closed to any element). $LiCoO_2$ and $Li_3PS_4$ are commonly used cathode material and solid-state electrolyte material in Li-ion batteries, respectively. The cathode/electrolyte interface is of particular interest in battery research as it largely affects the battery performance.

Figure 1 shows the reactivity as a function of molar fraction $x$ of $LiCoO_2$. Table 1 also lists all the critical reaction equations, and corresponding molar fraction of first reactant and reaction energies per mole of reaction equation. There are 8 nodes which corresponds to 8 critical reactions. Each node is a kink point in the reactivity profile. For example, the second node from the left with molar fraction of  LiCoO_2 0.667 corresponds to the reaction:

$$Li_3PS_4 + 2 LiCoO_2 = 0.5 CoS_2 + 0.5 Co_3S_4 +  Li_3PO_4 +  Li_2S$$

The reactivity for this node is -0.399 eV/atom. The reaction energy of the reaction above is -616.0 kJ/mol.

The largest reaction driving force (magnitude of reactivity) is found for two reactions with the molar fraction of $LiCoO_2$ being 0.686 and 0.742, respectively. The corresponding reactivity is -0.402 eV/atom.


Table 1. Critical reaction information for $\ce{LiCoO2}-\ce{Li3PS4}$ closed system
Since in reality the reaction between two phases can consume arbitrary amounts of either phase depending on the diffusion, the molar fraction in the mixed region is not necessarily the critical fraction in the table, but can be any value from 0 to 1. If the molar fraction is not exactly equal to the critical fraction, the reaction is a linear combination of the critical reactions for its left neighbor node and right neighbor node, by the lever rule. As a consequence, all reaction products in the Table 1 are possible phases that may be generated at the interface.

### Reaction Plots in Open systems

We use the same  $LiCoO_2-Li_3PS_4$ system that open to Li reservoir to illustrate the reaction energy plot in open system. The Li reservoir is at 3 V vs. Li metal, i.e., the chemical potential of Li in the reservoir is 3 eV/atom lower than that in Li metal (corresponding to $\mu$ = -3 eV in the App).

In Figure 2, there are 16 labeled nodes that corresponds to 16 critical reactions. The reaction energy at $x = 0$ is negative, meaning that $Li_3PS_4$ is not stable at 3 V vs. Li metal. The decomposition reaction (read from the table) is:

$$Li_3PS_4 = 2.875 Li + 0.5 P_2S_7 + 0.125 LiS_4$$

Note that Li is extracted from the reactants to the Li reservoir. In contrast, $LiCoO_2$ is stable at this voltage as the reactivity is 0 eV/atom at $x = 1$. The interpretation of other reactions in the table is similar to those in the closed system.

By comparing Table 1 and Table 2, it can be seen that the reaction products in closed system and open system are quite different. This is because the stable materials in the closed system are not necessarily stable in the open system. Users can refer to Phase Diagram App to explore the phase diagrams of the corresponding systems.

## Thermodynamic Methodology

The Interface Reactions app uses the computed energies of materials from the Materials Project database. The computational methodology, default total energy corrections and accuracy can be found in Calculations Manual.

We consider two conditions for interface systems where chemical mixing occurs: 1) interfaces closed to any element (closed system), and 2) interfaces open to a particular element in the chemical system (open system). These two scenarios are treated separately as below:

### Chemical Mixing in Closed Systems

For closed systems, we calculate the reaction energy of two reactants A and B at varying mixing ratio $x$ of their normalized compositions using the equation:

$$\Delta E[A, B, x] = E_{pd} [x c_A + (1 - x) c_B] - x E_A - (1 - x) E_B$$

where $c_A$ and $c_B$ are the normalized compositions (i.e., the total number of atoms = 1) for reactants A and B, $E_A$ and $E_B$ are energies of ground state structures for reactants A and B, respectively. $E_{pd}[c]$ is the energy on the energy convex hull at composition c.

In the case where there is no structure in the database that matches the composition of reactant A or B, the energy on the convex hull $E_{pd}[c_A]$ or $E_{pd}[c_B]$ for that composition will be used instead. It should be noted that at endpoints ($x$ = 0 or 1), the reaction energies can be zero or negative, depending on whether the ground state structure energy of reactant A or B is on the hull or above the hull.

### Chemical Mixing in Open Systems

In many applications, interface systems are open to a particular element at a constant chemical potential. For example, in battery conditions, the electrode/electrolyte interface is open to lithium during battery cycling. The relevant thermodynamic potential in an open system is the grand potential $\Phi$. For instance, for a system open to Li at chemical potential $\mu_{Li}$, the grand potential for reactant with composition c is obtained using the equation:

$$\Phi[c, \mu_{Li}] = (E[c] - n_{Li}[c] \mu_{Li})/n_{non-Li}[c]$$

where E[c] is the energy of ground state structure that has composition $c$. $n_{Li}[c]$ and $n_{non-Li}[c]$ are the number of lithium and non-Li atoms in composition formula c, respectively. Here, PV and TS terms are ignored. Because the system is open to Li, the grand potential is normalized by the number of non-Li atoms. We take the convex hull of $\Phi$ for all phases in the chemical system, and as a result the grand potential on the grand potential convex hull $\Phi_{pd}$ is a function of composition c and chemical potential $\mu_{Li}$:

$$\Phi_{pd}[c, \mu_{Li}] = \min_{c_{Li}}{\{(E_{pd}[c+c_{Li}] - n_{Li}[c+c_{Li}] \mu_{Li}) / n_{non-Li}[c]\}}$$

where $c_{Li}$ is the number of Li atoms added/extracted to the system from the Li reservoir and therefore can take positive or negative value.

The reaction energy is then calculated using:

$$\Delta \Phi[A, B, \mu_{Li}, x] = \Phi_{pd}[xc_A + (1 - x) c_B, \mu_{Li}] - x \Phi_A[\mu_{Li}] - (1 - x) \Phi_B[\mu_{Li}]$$

### Remarks

Since the Interface Reactions app is based on the analysis of the energy convex hull, compounds that are metastable may not show up in the reaction products, although they might be kinetically stabilized in experimental condition. Therefore, reactions not listed in the table are also possible to happen.

## Citation

To cite the Interface Reactions App, please reference the following works:

- W. D. Richards, L. J. Miara, Y. Wang, J. C. Kim, and G. Ceder., Interface Stability in Solid-State Batteries, Chemistry of Materials, vol. 28, 2016, pp. 266–273.

Note that the methodology used in this paper is slightly different from the one employed in the Interface Reactions App. In this paper, the energies for reactants are always the convex hull energy for the reactant compositions, whereas in the Interface Reactions App the default reactant energies are the ground state structure energies. Only when no structure in the database matches the reactant composition will the convex hull energy be used. User can restore the methodology used in the paper by additionally check the "Always use hull energies?" box in the "Advanced options".


## References

## Authors

1. Yihan Xiao
2. Rachel Woods-Robinson
